[ Silence ]
[ Music ]
>> Lisa Garr: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
Bill Stierle is joining
me again today.
He is a communication
specialist and a mediator
who has developed a link
between emotional intelligence
and thinking styles technology
through a brain dominance
model system.
And our show today is
talking about on how
to implement this system
to increase communication
between people in conflicts
in both home and at work.
Welcome back to the show Bill.
Thanks for being here.
>> Bill Stierle: Thanks
for another back again.
It's-- I feel grateful
for being here
and sharing this information.
>> Lisa: You have so much
information and what we talked
about a little bit
before and I will touch
on this again is the
brain dominants model.
So there're four
different quadrants
that you've identified based
on the Herrmann Brain Dominance
Model on how people communicate.
>> Stierle: Yeah, the main
thing is to get use to is,
is that the front part of our
brain has this very logical
and analytical part that
goes here that works
from the upper left part.
And the upper right part of
the brain has this visual
and this ability to think in a
holistic way and synthesizing,
integrate the way
an artist does.
And then there is this
emotional part of our brain
that really activates and allows
us to move into action when all
of the emotion moves
inside our body.
And then there is this
lower left part of the brain
that really puts things
into order they does
lot of the time keeping.
And this metaphor, this very
strong metaphor allows us
to talk about brain, brain
science in a way to bring it
into a practical sense
both at home and at work
and to really talked about
how we can best leverage
our communication--
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: -- so
it goes better.
>> Lisa: So-- And then, there's
different colors associated
with this type of thinking.
So the blue color is more that
intellectual thinker, right?
>> Stierle: Uh-hmm.
Yes.
>> Lisa: And then?
>> Stierle: And then the green
is more-- more this organized,
planned, detailed, and
sequenced style thinker.
The emotional part of
the brain kinesthetic,
feeling based style thinking--
>> Lisa: Is red?
>> Stierle: -- is red.
And then, the yellow
part is synthesizing,
integrating conceptual
style thinking.
>> Lisa: Visual?
>> Stierle: Visual, big
picture of thinking.
>> Lisa: OK, great.
All right.
So now, how does this work where
you in say, a work environment
and you want to learn
how to resolve a conflict
to the co-worker who clearly
has a different way of thinking
in a different style of working.
>> Stierle: Well the--
a big part of the last show
that we did was we
really actually talked
about the balance of
this different ones
and different workers are going
to come from different places.
You know, there's going to
be some people, they're going
to approach things from logical
place and some people are going
to be approaching things
from an interpersonal place.
And to be able to
appreciate the differences
between those four
different values sets.
And to be able to also to be
able to manage the emotions
that go along with those.
>> Lisa: And not to judge that
person but to be accepting
of that person and you
mention a very important word.
>> Stierle: Appreciate
the differences.
>> Lisa: Appreciate
the differences?
>> Stierle: How can I
appreciate the differences
and the sentences is that it's
not personal, its preference.
>> Lisa: That's it.
Uh-hmm.
>> Stierle: And there's
a preference
that this person thinks that
there're super power and then,
all of this have are kryptonite.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Those things
that we're not very good at.
>> Lisa: All right, so,
at the end of the show
last time you talk
about this our limbic style of
thinking which is our old style
of thinking, it's the
survival mechanism,
it's the emotional
center of the brain.
>> Stierle: Yeah, the back
part of the limbic part
of our brain is really
built for a long term memory
and emotional style of thinking
and it's built for safe keeping
and this, I want to
really stay connected.
I want to use this inter--
this intuitive style feeling.
I'm going to sense the
feelings of others and myself.
And where the newer part
of our thinking is more the
logical part of the brain
and the future orient
to brain and this part
of our brain has 400,000
connections per micron
of neuron connections.
And this part of the brain has
more a 4.3 million connections.
>> Lisa: So there's a lot
more activity happening?
>> Stierle: A lot
more activity and--
>> Lisa: And the emotional and
the survival part of the brain?
>> Stierle: Yes.
>> Lisa: And that happens first?
>> Stierle: That's the-- and
depending on the environment.
Our cells will actually
literally respond
to a perceived or real threat.
>> Lisa: Fear.
Fear and threats in thing--
>> Stierle: Fear--
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: -- is going to be an
emotion that is going to be one
of those combinations of
neuropeptides inside our body.
>> Lisa: Is that why
the news, "If It Bleeds,
It leads" is so popular--
>> Stierle: Yes [multiple
speaker]--
>> Lisa: And violence in films.
>> Stierle: And boy,
very, very well stated.
Is news is very limbic.
It's fed into the limbic
system so that if I am going
to see something dangerous and
it's going to cause a fight,
flight and freeze
response inside my body
and I want to know what to do.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Even if
it's across the world.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: Even
across the world.
>> Lisa: Are they
causes [phonetic]--
>> Stierle: Then
all of a sudden,
I'm going to have
empathetic approach,
it's going to trigger my limbic
part of the brain and I'm going
to respond to it by
staying on the channel.
>> Lisa: I see.
>> Stierle: I'm going
to stay there.
I'm going to stay on this
because this news is feeding
into my fight, flight
and freeze.
>> Lisa: And that's what this--
of the films do it that are
very action and violent,
oriented films is they
keep the listener engaged
because it engages the
limbic system of the brain.
>> Stierle: That's correct.
I'm going to engage from
scene to scene to find
out what happens
with this character
because my brain is
engaged into this fight,
fight and freeze response.
>> Lisa: Does the brain want
to organize it and resolve it?
Is that why there are happy
endings are always good
at the end of-- if the
movie ever ends there,
you want to back
and watch it so--
>> Stierle: That's right.
It's I want to end.
I want to be on the
roller coasted ride.
And all this different chemicals
or these different molecules
of the motion are moving
around my body and I am
on the rollercoaster
ride and I'm--
hoping that I have just
enough control of this
to make sense of this.
I'm trained to then make
meaning out of what I just saw.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: I'm going to
make a meaning out of it.
>> Lisa: That's probably why
people love rollercoasters
'cause they're always
on the edge of control.
>> Stierle: That's right.
>> Lisa: Out of control.
>> Lisa: But knowing that
there's going to be end to it.
>> Stierle: That's right
and they've got trust
that so a movie is last of the
threat that a rollercoaster is.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Because your
sticking your body into it.
>> Lisa: Yup.
You're sitting in a seat.
>> Stierle: You know
you're sitting in a seat.
You know it's virtual.
>> Lisa: So, what is the study
that we are looking at here?
Take a look at the slide.
There's a study that--
>> Stierle: Oh yeah, sure.
>> Lisa: -- was done about--
>> Stierle: Sure.
Yeah, about change.
Yeah, the biggest thing
about change, it's very much
like if you imagine of this part
of the brain is an elephant.
>> Lisa: The back.
>> Stierle: And this part of the
brain is little person sitting
on top of the elephant.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: With the stick.
>> Stierle: OK?
So this part of the brain,
the logical part in the future
or I'm saying, yeah we
want to go somewhere.
This is why a New Year's
resolution doesn't work so well.
>> Lisa: Oh.
>> Stierle: OK.
It doesn't work so well
because the limbic part
of the brain defaults to what
you know or know what to be true
or know what's a habit.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: So, if you grew
up in your family eating
thanksgiving a certain way,
the limbic part of your
brain remembers that.
And it's very hard for you
then to change the menu.
>> Lisa: So if you grew up
eating turkey and then you want
to be vegan that
is going to be--
so the brain stays into a
certain way of habitual thinking
as a survival mechanism.
>> Stierle: That's correct.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: And its--
and it's done on purpose.
And the reason why the
brain does it on purpose is
because this part
of the brain is able
to store more information
so you don't have
to keep relearning things.
OK. Usually, if you think about
driving a car and if you think
about young person
driving a car,
they try to drive
their car through this.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: Logically
and specially
and that's why their insurance
rates are higher 'cause they ran
into crop.
[ Laughter ]
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: Do too.
And it's not until
this thing has driven
down into the limbic part of the
brain that it becomes habitual.
You and I do not need to learn
how to do right turn.
>> Lisa: So-- So there
is no habitual pattern
that they base driving on and
they have to intellectualize it
and that's why they do
crash into poles.
>> Stierle: That's correct.
>> Lisa: It is the
highest incidents
of accidents is teenagers.
>> Stierle: That's correct
because they don't have
spacial acuity or to ability
to logical-- logically--
>> Lisa: So, even if they
give them the car keys
at 20, it's not going to
create any different result.
>> Stierle: Yeah.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Yes.
>> Lisa: Lets take a look at
this next slide where is--
this is where the-- or
you were just talking
about this where the emotions.
>> Stierle: That's right.
In the emotions, what happen is
that when the emotions shows up,
it'll actually knock us
out of logical thinking
and locked us out of it.
This is why-- this is why
death sense is not a deterrent.
We have all this
things on the book
that if you just have death
sentence that will deter people
from killing each other.
Yeah, it doesn't work that way.
It doesn't work that way.
And by the way, it cost
millions to dollars
to actually execute
the death sense.
It's cheaper to keep them
in jail for their life
if they are a danger to society.
It's cheaper to keep them
than to execute them.
It's much more expensive
legally.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Stierle: Legally, so
it's not...
>> Lisa: So why is it not
a deterrent emotionally?
>> Stierle: Is not a deterrent
it because the emotional part
of the brain and the safe
keeping part of the brain,
if it makes it real
will shoot and realize--
>> Lisa: Later.
>> Stierle: -- after that
that wasn't such a good idea.
>> Lisa: Let's talk about
in terms of relationships.
>> Stierle: Oh, yeah.
>> Lisa: Where emotions to
take over a relationship or--
and we talk about it
in parenting as well.
But--
>> Stierle: Sure.
>> Lisa: -- where the emotions
will take over a relationship
and not give you the
thinking ability to know
if this person is right
for you or not, is that?
>> Stierle: That's correct.
So what happens is that--
I'm connecting to this person
because there is a
perceived to connection.
There's perceived that I'm
going to get a love-affection.
But meanwhile, the emotional
part of our brain is starting
to move to-- in that direction
because it's perceived.
So, in-- Like in
our last show one
of the things you talked about,
if there was a spider
crawling towards you.
>> Lisa: Yeah, I'd
run out at the door.
>> Stierle: That's correct.
You're going to choose
a fight response.
OK. Now let's do
it the other way.
Let's suppose the spider is
here and crawling towards me.
>> Lisa: I'm still running out.
I'm sure.
[ Laughter ]
>> Stierle: Now, you're
running out the door
but I'm actually
watching and then go
in like, is the danger real?
I'm going to ask that question.
Well, not really real.
Now, I know that I've
got three choices.
Freeze is my first choice.
I'm going to wait
to see if it's going
to crawl towards you
or crawl towards me.
Now, your body is actually
engaged in the physiology of it.
So, if you go to this slide
right here, the neuropeptides
of anxious, nervous, worried,
scared are already showing
up in your-- Lisa, there
is no spider there.
But it does-- your body
cannot tell the difference.
>> Lisa: You happen to pick
my biggest fear though.
>> Stierle: It cool.
OK. OK.
>> Lisa: I mean, it will jump--
>> Stierle: So, it's
crawling towards me.
So let me get rid for you.
Ready?
>> Lisa. OK.
>> Stierle: Watch.
Let me watch, let me watch.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: A fight response if
the best response in this case.
See, I just kill the
spider for your Lisa.
>> Lisa: I can't do that.
>> Stierle: I just step it.
Now you can't 'cause your
flight response is better.
So your flight response is
a better choice for you.
In these choices that if it's
moving or I could choose that
or I can help my
friend Lisa and go.
Lisa, I am glad I took
care of that spider
for you even though
it's imaginary.
Now, if we take a look
at this next slide,
watch what happens here.
We could do on the
positive side of defense.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: As the
audience reads this thing.
Go ahead and read it.
What does it say?
>> Lisa: Ice cream is good.
>> Stierle: OK.
Now, think of your two
favorite ice creams.
Favorite-- What's your
first favorite ice cream?
What's your favorite ice cream.
>> Lisa: Mint Chip.
>> Stierle: Mint Chip.
OK, let's put two scoops of
Mint Chip in front of you.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: OK.
Now, imagine it there.
You got it?
>> Lisa: Ah-huh!
>> Stierle: OK, good.
And if you take a scope of
it and it's just about ready
to come in to your mouth.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: OK.
You know, what Mint
Chip tastes like.
Yeah, you've kind of
like it, don't you?
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: And two scoops
will be a really good idea.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Yeah, that feels
really good, doesn't it?
Yeah, two scoops
and you know maybe
after the show we can go get--
go get some ice cream
downstairs.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: 'Cause I know
that there's some downstairs,
so we can get some if you like.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: You know, and if you
like, I can send you over some
to your house and you can have--
you know, I'll send you
even a gallon of it.
>> Lisa: Nice.
>> Stierle: I'll
be glad to do it.
Now inside your body, your
physiology is changing.
Now think of the ice cream
and look at the slide
and then hit the clicker,
watch what happens.
>> Lisa: Oh, that's interesting.
Oh, yeah. That's great.
>> Stierle: Now, notice
that there's a physiology
change 'cause I sort
of just took the ice
cream away from you.
Your body is looking at that
and trying to resolve the issue.
Because I just kept
putting this--
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: -- stimulus
is in the thought
of I'm sending you ice cream.
>> Lisa: I saw ice
cream cake in my mind.
Yeah.
>> Stierle: And we're going to
get it downstairs and ice cream
and your physiology
is changing to it.
Now, if you go backwards and
bring the screen back up.
Look at ice cream is good.
Now watch how your physiology
will change just slightly.
You go like, you restored it.
But wait, wait, wait.
Now, all I did is to
[multiple speaker].
[ Laughter ]
>> Stierle: There's no ice.
There has never been
any ice cream.
But our body can not
tell the difference.
So now, click down to things
and click the next slide 'cause
what our body does is fill
in the information.
>> Lisa: Oh, OK.
I see.
>> Stierle: See it
fills in the reality.
So all that's somebody's got
to do is hammer
on message whether it
be a message about--
>> Lisa: ObamaCare.
>> Stierle: About
ObamaCare, financial,
you know, or the bankers.
>> Lisa: Recession.
>> Stierle: Or the recession
>> Lisa: Yeah, yes.
>> Stierle: Or the
real estate market or--
see, I'll just put the
stimulus that's in it and all
of a sudden, the
audience is going
to get this off real quick.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: Because
they're going to activate
if they got impacted with
the financial down term.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: Their physiology
is changing to that.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: If they lost
the house in for closure,
immediately your audience
is going like that,
if they have the thought about
the financial institutions
and the ones that
were responsible for.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: If there
is a message for that.
If there is message you want
to put another one, no--
very few people went
to jail over it.
Now, all of a sudden, they just
had fairness, respect, you know,
a consideration, protection.
You know, well if you--
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: -- if there's no
rule there then there's no fun,
no harm, no value,
you know or a wage.
That's called deregulation.
Wow, isn't that interesting?
But regulation is
bad.
No. It's for safekeeping.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: See, those
are different things.
Now, all of a sudden, what I'm
doing right now is doing various
different things of
closing the thing
of in our physiology
is changing as it goes.
The physiology keeps changing.
OK? And that's the thing to be--
to remember is our body is an
alignment with the environment
and we're going to perceive
and we're going to connect
to the environment in different
ways real or imaginative .
>> Lisa: So, this has to do with
the brain styles of thinking
because our environment say, I'm
a creative thinker which I am.
I'm going to react towards
the rule maker differently.
>> Stierle: That's correct.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: That's right.
You're going to react
to rule maker.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: And a lot of this
thing is language driven.
A lot of our emotional
response is language driven.
For example, let's take my son
Tristan [assumed spelling] who,
you know, watch the TV show.
And when he watch the TV show,
one of the character
said this word, "idiot".
Yeah, it took me about
two weeks to get idiot
out of his consciousness.
>> Lisa: I see.
OK.
>> Stierle: What?
"Cause he used it, he felt--
>> Lisa: Felt it.
>> Stierle: -- a physiological
change when he said it.
There was a laughter
inside the show, therefore,
he thought he take that
word out for a spin.
Now, when he said,
"Dad you're an idiot."
[ Laughter ]
I have to listen to
that as a context.
>> Lisa: OK.
Yes.
>> Stierle: And then
I'm going to respond
to him in subtext way.
So Tristan, could you be feeling
frustrated even to like me
to have awareness
about something.
[ Laughter ]
He goes like, "Huh?"
>> Lisa: Huh?
>> Stierle: Why?
Because I want him to know that
the word idiot sets up here
and the word awareness
sits underneath it.
>> Lisa: Oh, interesting
so you're reframing the
context around idiot.
>> Stierle: That's correct,
rather than the idiot is
somebody that's stupid,
which is another word that I had
to get rid of too, by the way.
>> Lisa: Stupid.
>> Stierle: Because
they use these words.
>> Lisa: I see, OK.
>> Stierle: This labeling
context style words
and then how do I speak to
it just like ice cream just
like spider, I've got
to take this words
that are trigger words and
I've got to change them
to something that's going to be
more heart center rather than--
>> Lisa: Intellectual.
>> Stierle: And it's
rather than intellectual.
>> Lisa: OK, so you are
entraining bad
association with something by
overriding it with emotion.
>> Stierle: That's
right I want emotion--
>> Lisa: OK.
A new--
>> Stierle: I want to override
with an emotion and a need
that is underneath it.
If the need is awareness,
or the need to safe--
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Whatever
the need is.
>> Lisa: So lets talk about
needs based to communication.
>> Stierle: Sure.
>> Lisa: And you have
a strong background
in the nonviolent
communications.
>> Stierle: Yes.
Yes, I do.
>> Lisa: And if you can
explain that a little bit.
>> Stierle: So for
last 13 years,
I've been training nonviolent
communication developed
by Marshall Rosenberg,
an international mediator
who took us four-step
model of communication.
Its really the foundation
of emotional intelligence
is as one practices.
This school-- tool they become
more emotionally intelligent
about themselves as
well as about others.
What is-- What a good tool.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: And we know, by all
the research that's been done
in emotional intelligence, how
that value set is actually one
that is a better indicator
of success and the ability
to work together and to be have
to contribute is the ability
to deal with emotional
intelligence is actually a
little bit stronger rather than
in intellectual intelligence
or fact-based intelligence.
>> Lisa: It's fascinating.
I've read about it.
It's solving war conflict and
neighborhood conflict and--
>> Stierle: Yes.
>> Lisa: -- game violence
and its really has been an
effective tool and it's been
around for a very long time.
I like how you combine it
with the Hermann
Brain Dominance Model.
>> Stierle: Yes.
>> Lisa: So, the different
quadrants of thinking along
with the self awareness that the
emotional intelligence factor
gives you is a great combination
of those two methods.
>> Stierle: You know, by having
these two different methods,
there's a thinking piece to it
and allowing that to seat here,
and then, there is the emotional
intelligence piece over here
and they integrate so
wonderfully by the way.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: Is that--
what I'm talking
about is this an emotional
conflict that I need
to really provide
some compassion to?
Or, is this something that I can
really solve or engaged based
on the person's brain
thinking style?
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: The idea is when
we approach emotion is for us
to change a very small limiting
belief that we have been taught.
Here it is.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: There
is no such thing
as a good feeling
or a bad feeling.
>> Lisa: Why not?
>> Stierle: There is no such
thing as a negative feeling
or a positive feeling.
My request to the audience and
for you is to just change it
to a new-- a new definition.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Feelings
are only indicators.
Feelings are only indicators
'cause if I take that spider
at least and I move it here,
is scared a bad feeling?
>> Lisa: It's a feeling.
>> Stierle: It's
an indicator right?
>> Lisa: It's an
indicator, right.
>> Stierle: OK.
So, is it a bad feeling though?
>> Lisa: No.
>> Stierle: Not really.
Not really.
>> Lisa: Absolutely, yeah.
>> Stierle: Is fear
a bad feeling?
>> Lisa: Yes.
It could be.
>> Stierle: Not really.
>> Lisa: It's not?
>> Stierle: No.
It's indicating something as--
>> Lisa: That's an indicator.
OK, yeah, that's a big change.
So, fear is an indicator.
>> Stierle: Yeah.
Is depressed a bad feeling?
>> Lisa: Most with
things so, yes.
>> Stierle: Because what?
It's an indicator.
It tells us that the state
of our physiology is
not doing so well.
I'm not saying it's a--
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: -- greatest
feeling that we have.
>> Lisa: But you can still feel
things like joy and exuberance
and some of those are on the
other side of the scale right?
>>
>> Stierle: Well boy, that's
I'm glad you mention that.
If you look at our chart here,
you're going to notice that joy,
excited, and exuberance
is on the top part
of the indicator scale.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: And then
on the bottom part
of the indicator scale
at the very bottom is
depress setting there.
>> Lisa: Depression.
>> Stierle: Of course in
the middle guess what, calm,
peaceful is sitting in there.
>> Lisa: How nice.
>> Stierle: It's in the middle.
So, if you're feeling
frustrated, it just tells us
that in need of ours
is not being meet.
>> Lisa: OK.
So--
>> Stierle: So, what
need is caused
by this spider crawling
towards me if not being met?
>> Lisa: I need safety.
>> Stierle: Safety.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: So, fear because
safety might not be met.
For what?
>> Lisa: So once again you
pick by this fear that's spider
in mind is a gymnast and the
spider does double back gainer
in to my--
[ Laughter ]
>> Stierle: I'm very clear
that this particular
imaginary spider that I have.
Now, if we change it to a
bowl of ice cream being pour,
push into your direction,
you're going to feel the light
and energize because the
taste of it and the comfort
that ice cream can provide--
>> Lisa: OK.
So, I'm on the upper
end under needs.
>> Stierle: And you
apprehended the--
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: -- appearance
[phonetic] 'cause those are the
different needs that
are being in met.
>> Lisa: So, need based to
communication is the key
to what you teach in terms
of effective parenting,
effective business
relationships effective
in a personal relationships
and relationship with yourself.
>> Stierle: That's right.
As a mediator, as somebody
that teaches people
to communicate better,
it's trying to change some
very small limiting beliefs
so that they can move
forward and exchange it
so that we start using emotions
for what they are designed for.
>> Lisa: So, this is key.
So, when we-- when we start
to understand what needs,
what the needs are as indicators
as say, then it will give us
to the red light, green light to
what the emotion is behind it.
>> Stierle: That's correct.
So, if I feel frustrated,
there's a need that's
not being meet.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: If I feel thorn
that tells me two needs
are not being met.
Right now, my need
for connection
with is you is being meet.
And at the same time, my need
for a connection is not
being met with my family.
>> Lisa: Right.
Right.
>> Stierle: So I feel delighted
about my need for connection
and contribution with
you at the same time,
if I think about playing
with my seven-year-old,
you know swimming
in the hot tub.
>> Lisa: Absolutely.
>> Stierle: See.
Look at all this stuff.
There's--
>> Lisa: So then, by
calling out those two needs,
do you feel more complete in
recognizing those feeling?
>> Stierle: Yeah.
Then I can choose.
>> Lisa: Then you can choose.
>> Stierle: That I could
choose 'cause I know
which one I'm picking.
>> Lisa: So you are choosing
to be here right now.
>> Stierle: You know what
I'm going to choose be full
in present with you Lisa and--
>> Lisa: That's very nice.
>> Stierle: -- and meet
the need for friendship.
But look at how--
>> Lisa: That is so great.
>> Stierle: -- all of a sudden,
we're getting reenergize
even thought about.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: You know, the
ability to exchange information,
to talked about something
that is valuable--
>> Lisa: Or excited about--
>> Stierle: -- to
contribute to the audience,
to talk about how energize this.
At the same time, if there
was something that showed
up that would, that you know,
something that would come
in from other, you know,
from another place.
We could feel confused
which tells us--
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle:-- that there
is several different needs
that aren't being met if we
get into accomplish issue.
>> Lisa: Indicator.
Uh-hmm, right.
>> Stierle: If we are-- If we're
feeling panic that tells us
that thing-- the engine-- the
engine is not working right.
Furious tells us that seven
needs are not being met.
>> Lisa: Seven.
Wow, there's a slide.
There's a great scale
that you have here on one
of these slides but, let's
take a look at this idea
of taking these unmet needs.
>> Stierle: Yes.
>> Lisa: And what
pushes my buttons.
OK?
>> Stierle: That's right.
That's right.
And that's the idea is like
lets say-- lets say our--
se our eyes and our ears
are meant really basically
for really one thing,
the power of observation.
Not to judge, just to observe.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: I want
to see things.
What am I seeing?
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: What am I hearing?
What did the person say?
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: OK.
What did they say?
If I can hold it here, and
not let it hit the button--
>> Lisa: Right, 'cause sometimes
it's not very vice nice
like you're mean like--
>> Stierle: Oh, I
like that sentence.
Say that back-- now watch.
Say you're mean.
Bill you're mean.
Go.
>> Lisa: Bill, you're mean.
>> Stierle: OK, so
the words are coming.
If it hits this button towards
kindness, I will feel sad.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: OK.
If it hits this button called
respect, I might get angry.
Just so, you can't make me
feel, it's how I take it.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
So if a child says,
"Mommy I hate you."
>> Stierle: I love
that sentence.
>> Lisa: Well, I
hate that sentence.
>> Stierle: Here it comes.
"Mommy I hate you."
So immediately its--
if it hits the need
for connection then the
person would feel sad.
If it hits the need for love,
then you'll feel disheartened--
>> Lisa: Hurt.
Yes.
>> Stierle: Or hurt.
Right.
>> Lisa: So, what
do you do with that?
>> Stierle: OK.
Well, first thing
is connect to self.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: I feel hurt
and I really have a need
for kindness and
love between us.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: But I
hear that you feel mad
and you really want
me to hear something.
See, behind the word hate is,
could you be feeling some
hate right now and you want
to hear something
I'm not hearing.
"I want ice cream right now."
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: So you would really
like some choice right not.
See, it's not about hating mom.
>> Lisa: No.
This is a great, great
way to start so--
>> Stierle: It's about choice.
>> Lisa: Let's take it
to business relationship
for someone who is talking
about you behind your back.
>> Stierle: Oh, good sentence.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: So lets
suppose they say something
and you find out about it.
OK. So now I'll--
>> Lisa: Oh, so the
sentence would be,
"She's not very good
at her job."
>> Stierle: Excellent sentence.
So, I'm going to use my ears
as observation, no judgment.
Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Not very good
at a job and I want to find
out about that in a sense.
So let's say, "Hey listen.
I'd like to get some
understanding
about why you said that."
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Understanding
is the need.
If it hits the need
for the respect,
anger is going to show up.
>> Lisa: So, could you
say to that person,
"I'm feeling a lack of respect."
>> Stierle: I'm feeling
uncomfortable right now
and I need some, I need some--
>> Lisa: Understanding.
>> Stierle: -- understanding
or, and I'm really feeling mad
and I really some be respect
between the two of us.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: And when
I hear that I'm good
at the job with that say that.
I want to get some understanding
about what the motive was.
And I want really make sure
that there's mutual respect
between you and I
in the workplace.
>> Lisa: OK.
So connect to need.
So, say if I have a complaint
that my coworker isn't
pulling their weight.
Or they're not doing
as much I'm doing.
Say, for example.
>> Stierle: Great.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: Sure.
>> Lisa: So, my need of--
'cause this is a common
complaint in the workplace.
My need-- what would that--
>> Stierle: Fairness.
>> Lisa: Fairness.
OK.
>> Stierle: Pulling their
weight is fairness.
So the audience to
get the...
that the sentences
pulling you weight,
that's a context sentence.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: The subtext
is fairness
and maybe consideration.
Now, the audiences
might be watching me.
I'm pointing to-- this
is my heart space.
This is where my needs are.
My gut, my gut feeling is what
I'm pointing to down here.
So my little slide
is going like, OK,
if somebody cuts me off in
a car and I'm seeing that,
then my need for consideration--
>> Lisa: Is not met.
>> Stierle: -- is not met.
And irritated, that's
how I'm going to feel.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Now if
I want to dump
that emotion very quickly
I would say this to my self
in the car while I'm driving.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: "Man, I feel
irritated 'cause my need
for consideration
is met that driver.
I'm localizing and I'm saying
this happened in this moment."
>> Lisa: And then what happens?
>> Stierle: Then happens is
because I'm using an emotional
intelligence, I'm saying,
"I feel because I need."
They don't have anymore
power me.
>> Lisa: Over you.
So it dissipates
the frustration.
>> Stierle: That's right.
It's going to change--
>> Lisa: Very good.
>> Stierle: -- my physiology.
>> Lisa: This could have to
do with, I mean this is key
in terms of relationships.
That one thing that
your spouse does
that pushes your buttons or--
>> Stierle: Well, you can have
that thought and tell that story
over and over again for
15 or 20 or 30 years.
And meanwhile, it
just happened once
and the person needed feedback.
Now, in the next--
>> Lisa: Leaving your socks
in the floor, whatever yeah.
>> Stierle: But when we're
doing this and the next slide
that you have up here is that
I'm telling myself stories.
And that's the thing that's
actually causing my physiology
to escalate.
It'll sound like this.
"That person kept me off.
It didn't meet my need
for considerations."
You know what, you know,
they could've hit me.
Now, I just push my
own button for safety.
Now I feel scared and irritated.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: Then I go back
up to my head for help.
It doesn't and so help here.
Watch. LA drivers are
the worst of the world.
Now I just pushed my
button for fairness.
Now I got consideration
and safety and fairness.
>> Lisa: All lead up.
>> Stierle: All lead up.
You know, it does take--
just takes a microsecond 'cause
this next slide I'll show,
ready?
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: They
meant to do that.
They saw me here.
Who do they think they are?
Now I just put my respect
button.
Now, I got respect.
>> Lisa: They're
trying to hurt me.
>> Stierle: And
they're trying to, so.
>> Lisa: Yes, yes.
>> Stierle: Meanwhile,
I'm escalating
and that's called
building an emotional load.
Just like the emotional load
builds, it could be reduced
by thought in language choice.
>> Lisa: So, lets take
an example of something
that your spouse does like
leaving the socks on the floor,
or the shoes on the floor.
So, my need for cleanliness
is not met.
Is that that thing--
>> Stierle: That's right, I
really need some cleanliness
and I need some order and
I need some consideration.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: And support.
Now I'm up to four needs.
You see all that is.
Listen, support would look
like you putting the stuff
in the hamper-- a hamper.
>> Lisa: Oh OK.
So this is what you say.
>> Stierle: Yeah.
So, I feel frustrated.
I need some support.
Support would like
putting it in the hamper.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: OK.
Listen, I really feel that
you're irritated
and I really have
a need for order.
Order would look like
putting the socks this way.
When you take them off,
please pull them out,
so when I wash them, I don't
have to pull them out for you.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: 'Cause
they kind of smell.
I have a need for order
and consideration.
And consideration would like
pulling you're socks out.
So the dirt is not in there
and I don't have to do it.
Would you be willing to meet
my need for consideration?
>> Lisa: This kind
of communication really
happens in a household?
>> Stierle: Yes.
If you pick it, if
you pick the word--
>> Lisa: Constantly--
>> Stierle: -- the
other person will--
the compliance rate
is so much higher.
If I go into my son,
Aden [assumed spelling],
and I say to him, "Aden, I
really have a need for care.
And care would like the
clothes that are on the floor
to be put in this basket.
That the wrappers that are
on your computer desk for it
to be put in the garbage
can right below the desk.
Would be willing to tell what
you've heard me said 'cause I
want him to get connected
to what I just said.
Not say the sentence, yes dad,
'cause the compliance rate
is only like 10 percent--
>> Lisa: It's over.
>> Stierle: If they say yes.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
And it's probably less.
>> Stierle: Yeah, anyhow,
but a lot of times you'd find
out the message sent is
not some message receive.
So, I always check it.
I say, could you
tell me a little
about what you think you say is
like, "Huh, what did you say?"
And he said yes to
something a second ago.
>> Lisa: That's good for
a child but for a spouse,
you can't really-- yeah.
>> Stierle: Well for spouse, you
just rephrase it a little bit.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: So, listen I just
want to make sure that I'm able
to get what you're
saying accurately.
So what you see will--
>> Lisa: Or, did you
hear what I said.
>> Stierle: Did you
hear what I say?
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: I couldn't
just-- let me see if I--
see if I've gotten, if your
message sent, message received.
So that it doesn't hear
like what the spouse.
You want to make sure it
doesn't hear like a demand
or it's just a request.
>> Lisa: But you can even--
so how would you say
that to your boss?
Did you hear what I said?
>> Stierle: For the boss, I
would say its like, "Listen,
I wasn't makes sure that I've
heard what you've said clearly."
>> Lisa: OK.
But what about what you
said so you feel hurt.
>> Stierle: Listen,
I want to make sure
that the message I
just said is something
that matches what's
going on in your head.
>> Lisa: Wow, that's empowering.
>> Stierle: Oh, it's huge
because the boss would go,
"Oh yeah, let me hear it again."
>> Lisa: Again, what
do you just said?
>> Stierle: Wait oh, and
the boss is going like,
I never really listen to him so,
and then they repeat something
back 'cause they give us some
things possible but I kind of
was thinking at about this way,
is that what you had in mind?
Oh yes, that's exact-- oh no, I
think I would like it this way.
Great, thank you very much.
'Cause I really want
to make sure
that it's the way
you would like it.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: So it turns into
a service piece rather than,
you know, there's a hundred
things going on in your head
and you're not listening to me.
>> Lisa: And also so then if you
don't do that, your brain starts
to fill up with all
this stories.
My boss hates me.
He doesn't listen to me.
He's going to hire
somebody else.
Dari dah dah [phonetic].
I mean, you can go
on with this--
>> Stierle: And you're
pressing the safekeeping part
of your brain and it's
causing your performance drop
because your brain goes into
fight, flight and freeze.
The story feeds on the
emotion part of the brain
and the brain is trying
to go after protection
where protection
wasn't necessary.
>> Lisa: So that
explains this next slide
which is an overflowing amount
of fight, flight or freeze
where you create your
story around something
that it just explodes.
>> Stierle: There's huge job
turnover that takes place here.
So many good employees leave
because they have
accumulated safety message--
>> Lisa: Stories--
>> Stierle: -- and stories
that are not in alignment
within the brain starts
to actually tilt
towards those things.
>> Lisa: So that this is,
does the brain functionality
actually decrease as the fight,
flight or freeze increases?
>> Stierle: Yeah, if
you keep pushing the--
if you keep pushing the button
based on a mental thought
and a belief and a meaning
making that you're doing
up here, the brain goes
into a protective mode.
It's got to go into
protective mode.
So, all the imprints
from childhood,
even generationally
the things that thing
that we've discovered
too is is that a spider,
the image of a spider, I
bring that or snake or an owl
or some of-- or the bird
or prey that'll show
up is a mental imprint
from our ancestors.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: You can show
you it too a little kid
and they've never
seen a spider before
but their genes remember it.
Their genes will
remember the spider.
Why? 'Cause that was a fear that
this ancestor had that said,
"Hey, the snake was dangerous."
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: You know a
very, very interesting.
So, there's a tracking of that.
>> Lisa: OK.
Interesting.
>> Stierle: Yeah.
>> Lisa: All right.
So, there's-- We're talking
about communication
styles here and--
>> Stierle: Yeah, that's right.
>> Lisa: -- how the
phases of communication
as you become more aware of
this communication styles,
your consciousness
increases, yes.
>> Stierle: Boy, you know the
biggest thing and the thing I
like to really do when I talk
about this particular slide is
to get people off the hook.
And the reason why I like to
get people off the hook is
that there so many
triggers that causes
to either become a
nice dead person--
>> Lisa: A nice dead person.
>> Stierle: -- is somebody
that submits our needs
to the needs of others.
Or a monster person that gets
our needs met our lashes out,
finally we've had it in
this volcano shows up.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: And then
this volcano shows up,
and then the submission
shows up,
and then this rebellion
and this control
shows up and this--
>> Lisa: This defines
most relationships.
>> Stierle: And this...
So it becomes a cycle of nice
dead person, monster person,
nice dead person, monster
person, nice dead person.
So--
>> Lisa: If you don't
execute how you feel.
>> Stierle: And in
relationship too,
what the need it
that's causing it.
It tends to work better to
not focus on feeling as much.
>> Lisa: Is this
why people blow up?
I mean, you hold it in, hold it
in, hold it in and you just blow
up at the tiniest little thing?
>> Stierle: That's correct.
You're going to-- it's because
it's like an accumulation
of things that are built up.
A series of needs that
haven't been fully expressed
or engage upon.
And by the way, on
the other side
of the explosion is depression.
Depression is only an
internal part of an--
>> Lisa: Series.
>> Stierle: -- explosion
of, you know, I can't,
it's not safe enough for
me to explode outside
because that's a jeopardy
that it'll provide
jeopardy to my life.
So I'm not going
to explode outside.
>> Lisa: I see.
>> Stierle: 'Cause if I did
that once when I was a kid
and when I was three years
old and I exploded and I--
and there was something and
my parent shut that down.
>> Lisa: And it wasn't safe.
>> Stierle: And I
realized that, "Hey.
I better not bring
this anger thing
or I'd better not bring
this full expression.
So, I'm going to play small and
I'm going to keep my voice
small. I'll play the martyr.
I'll try to eat out,
trying to get my needs met."
Meanwhile, we have a full
expression of our emotion.
There's nothing like a full
range of emotions to go like,
hey listen when you come
feeling angry and I know
that anger is causes by some
judgments I have and my need
for consideration and
fairness wasn't really met.
And this is what consideration
and fairness would look like.
And immediately the anger
has just left my body
that I'm haven't let go of--
>> Lisa: It's amazing
how that works.
>> Stierle: Having
let go of that..
>> Lisa: It is amazing
how that works.
So, this next slide talks
about the, how amygdala has
that fight, flight or
freeze functionality to it.
If you don't express that then
it-- does it start to shut down?
>> Stierle: That's correct.
It'll start-- It'll
start to shut down.
It starts to move into a place
of protection in reference to,
I'm not going to bring
that creative idea
out because I once
had that ability.
I brought that creative idea
and it was a great idea and boy,
that teacher shut me down
and so ideas are dangerous.
Boy, you know what?
I had that right answer in
math but my creative way
and my Einstein part of my
brain was going like, "Hey,
I'm manipulating math
in a different way
but the teacher called it wrong
because I wasn't
following the steps.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: And I miss the
step but you know what?
Actually, I was actually closer
to it than the teacher was.
But I wasn't really fully
supported and the rest
of the class laughed when
I came up with that answer.
So I better not express myself
fully and I better back off
on that and make sure I figure
it out before I speak up.
Now, I've got a hesitant
risk taker.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: You know, I mean--
>> Lisa: Yeah, we
can all identify.
Yes.
>> Stierle: If you think
about the financial
downturn even that part.
>> Lisa: The recession.
>> Stierle: The fight,
flight and freeze response
were just the problems
at the economy, the problem is
the ability to take risk again.
That's actually the problem.
>> Lisa: That's true.
>> Stierle: It goes,
who are the risk takers?
The entrepreneurs.
>> Lisa: Nobody will take risks
again, yeah.
Yeah.
>> Stierle: The entrepreneurs.
What is an entrepreneur do?
Come up with an idea.
What do they do
with that idea?
>> Lisa: Take a risk.
>> Stierle: Build
and take the risk.
And when they take the
risk what they have to do?
Hire people to support them.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: Interesting.
>> Lisa: Get other people
aligned with their vision.
>> Stierle: Get other people
aligned with that vision.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: Now I
got people aligned.
Now I've hired people.
But what does that mean?
Creative task base.
What is that do?
Get us a-- the idea is not
shutting down government
to make things work; the way we
got out of the last recession
by the way is to grow
our self out of it.
>> Lisa: Yeah, we did.
>> Stierle: To grow,
well what do you need to do?
Feed entrepreneurs.
Now let's say that every
entrepreneur has the best idea
on the planet but are very
clear about this detail.
You start funding them and
build that incubation on risk
and get them to higher
marketing people
and costumer service
people and inter, you know,
implementing people like
feeling pretty good idea.
>> Lisa: You know the
pack was born
out of the last recession?
>> Stierle: That's right.
>> Lisa: That's a good example.
>> Stierle: It's called
growing-- grow out of the issue.
Don't think that you can reduce
out of the issue 'cause you
can't reduce out of the issue.
You cant like put a big,
you know, control over stuff
because the population
has grown past that now,
when you already
past that point.
>> Lisa: Yeah and that's--
>> Stierle: You can't
shut growth down.
Its likes trying to--
>> Lisa: Not in this
day and age.
>> Stierle: No.
No. Human beings are
going to still put--
be putting human
beings on the planet.
So we've got to figure
how to grow.
>> Lisa: We always have.
That's what progress is.
>> Stierle: Or why not.
Yeah, it works much
better that way.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
All right.
So, going back to Marshall
Rosenberg's definition
of nonviolent communication,
there is a side here to kind
of redefined the
[multiple speaker]--
>> Stierle: There is.
Here is the slide and really
basically this slide is talking
about four steps.
And you also notice that these
four steps are color coded.
And the reason why they're color
coded is because they're talking
about different parts
of the brain
or different styles of thinking.
>> Lisa: Interesting.
>> Stierle: That's
a different piece
of the equation you haven't
seen before but watch this.
It's that observation is
more powerful than judgment.
Observation.
How do we observe something?
Actually, there's a
very important quote.
The highest form of
intelligence is the ability
to observe without judgment.
>> Lisa: That is incredible.
>> Stierle: OK.
>> Lisa: Neutrality.
>> Stierle: Very,
very, very I want to--
I want to observe that
judgment so all the people
that you're listening to on news
>> Lisa: That could solve
whole much conflict.
Yes.
>> Stierle: All the people were
listening to our news are not
in the place of observation.
They're in the place
of judgment.
Why? Because a judgment
stimulates the limbic part
of the brain because guess what?
Now all of a sudden, I'm
going to be getting engaged.
Why? Because you've
engaged my fight,
flight and freeze response.
>> Lisa: Right.
Right.
>> Stierle: You're not
observing the whole thing.
You're nor saying, "Hey, what
is the healthcare thing going
to really do and what
is the financial impact
and really looking that is
from an observation place is
that we're going to save more
money by doing it this way
than doing it the way
what we've been doing it.
Will some people be
affected by that?
Absolutely, because
guess what, you're trying
to institute change that is over
the long more cost effective.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: And that's
the thing.
We're playing the long game
instead of the short game.
That's what we're playing.
>> Lisa: It's not working.
[ Laughter ]
>> Stierle: Well.
>> Lisa: Well, that
was my judgment.
OK, the observation
is that's what is.
That is what is happening.
>> Stierle: That's
what is happening.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: Well done.
So look at how you moved your
place into an observation place.
>> Lisa: Yes, yes.
>> Stierle: Well done.
So, we can move into a place of
judgment and see is this true?
And then say, "Oh, I guess it
is from the bigger perspective."
That's called the difference
between a child's response
and an adult's response.
>> Lisa: Well, look at the
nation's response to ObamaCare.
>> Stierle: Because of--
>> Lisa: Oh well,
tehre's a lot--
>> Stierle: -- messaging.
>> Lisa: Yeah, a lot of--
lack of communication
or misunderstanding
or not clarity around it, yeah.
>> Stierle: Well, yeah.
If I want to pound
a belief structure
and I create a limbic response
to call people to get scared
about it, all I got to
do is just scare people
and it's easy to scare people.
And it because that its easy to
where you can imagine, you know,
a snake or, you know, a
lion or something like that
and if I keep saying
there's a lion there,
there's a lion there.
You know there's a lion on
the other side of that door.
There's a lion on the
other side of that door.
The brain cannot
tell the difference.
>> Lisa: So it's a
scare tactic and--
>> Stierle: I am going to
scare to not meet the need
for safety because it's unknown.
It's behind the door,
Lisa there's a lion.
Is there generally
a lion behind?
No.
>> Lisa: That's very interesting
what you've just said,
very interesting.
OK, so let's talk about
needs not being met.
>> Stierle: Excellent--
Excellent things.
The idea then is to,
emotions are always going
to follow a need.
So, when there's a
stimulus that's coming in
and my eyeball is seeing it
or my ears are hearing it,
it's going to push a button.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: And that's going
to cause an emotion to show up.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Nobody can
make us feel anything.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: It's how we take it.
So, is it the need for
respect that's getting pushed?
Is it the need for fairness
that's getting pushed?
Is it the need for connection
>> Lisa: Then that's what all
of these different needs are
and so you can take this slide
and you could always
measure this
against the need its not being.
And so if you're feeling
upset about something,
you can just look in and
say, OK maybe I'm feeling
that I'm not having
trust and then so,
this could be a good
way to start,
getting in touch
with your needs.
>> Stierle: That's exactly right
and we have not been taught.
In needs base narrative.
We've been taught a
problem solving narrative.
And this is why everybody
gets off the hook is
that if we're taught a
problem solving narrative,
that feelings are supposed to
be fixed that there's supposed
to be a good feeling
and a bad feeling.
That means that that's not
the way the body's work.
That's not-- That's not our
natural design because can't--
Lisa, if you and I do not
have access to scared,
nervous, anxious and fear.
If we don't know those
things, we cannot drive a car.
Because if we're
driving and we're happy--
>> Lisa: Yes, yes.
>> Stierle: -- that's
when we're in trouble.
[ Laughter ]
'Cause we're actually the--
most of our needs are being met
and we're not paying attention
to and when we're not in touch
to the need for safety.
>> Lisa: So there are
required needs to keep us
in the room.
>> Stierle: Yeah.
I want to-- our physiology is
designed for that response.
>> Lisa: Responsiveness, yes
I was just going to say that.
Right.
>> Stierle: So the-- When we
first look at neuropeptides
and this molecules of
emotion that show up,
the first things is they
start showing in bony fish.
So, if look at bony
fish and we say, OK.
Imagine a school of fish.
>> Lisa: Yeah.
>> Stierle: OK, here
is a school of fish
and all these fish
forming together.
This one fish has a
feeling and makes a turn.
Why does it have a feeling?
'Cause it has the access to
nervous, anxious, worried,
scared that has-- it
has that range, OK?
And what? 'Cause there's
a predator coming here.
>> Lisa: OK.
>> Stierle: Feeling
anxious, nervous,
worried is good for that fish.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: It's good for that--
'cause it's going to get eaten.
It turns and the rest
of the school turns.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: Do they
all talk to each other?
>> Lisa: No.
>> Stierle: No.
They didn't say, "Hey,
barracuda over on this side."
They ain't doing that right?
Energetically, they're
seeing the turn.
I mean they're energetically
experiencing the turn.
And the whole the
school is moving.
>> Lisa: Almost unconscious.
Yes, yes.
>> Stierle: That's right, it is
a whole field that is moving.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: You can--
They're moving the field.
'Cause you and I and as well
as the audience, if all of us--
if all of us have had
those intuitive moments--
>> Lisa: Oh yeah.
>> Stierle: -- where we know
something is up and we respond
without thinking about
it and say, "Hey,
I don't know what it was
but I just moved my car--
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: -- I missed
that whole accident.
>> Lisa: Right.
Or its possibly thinking, oh I
know that this person's going
to hurt me and I respond
this way whereas maybe
that person didn't have
an intention, yeah.
>> Stierle: Well, they
didn't have that intention.
We're creating the opposite
if it were there's
something inside--
>> Lisa: Creating the opposite.
>> Stierle: -- and
we're creating
that opposite thing
inside ourselves.
>> Lisa: As what this slide
tells is the opposite.
It's still-- when
the need is not met
and when the need is met.
So, on the left side, you'll
see the needs that are met
and the feelings
that you'll have.
Is that right?
>> Stierle: Yeah, on the
left side you're going to see
when how do I feel
when my need is met?
I'm going to feel glad, happy.
>> Lisa: Oh I see, OK.
>> Stierle: And on the left
side is jus, this side I'm going
to feel when my need is not met.
Look at that.
That there's going to
be a sense of anxious,
nervous, worried and scared.
So, at least I've just--
I request the people that
are listening is to get used
to making all feeling, you
know, just welcome them all
in with the sense
of curiousness.
I'm going to then say, wow you
feel frustrated, how wonderful.
Wow, you feel delighted, great.
Well, you feel angry.
>> Lisa: What need
is not being met?
>> Stierle: So, when my
seven-year old was like to two
and three and they would go
into a thing called tantrum
like that's a bad thing, there's
nothing bad to the tantrum.
Are you kidding me?
>> Lisa: 'it's just a
need that's not being met.
>> Stierle: That kid is
practicing his emotions.
That animal, that
little wonderful ball of,
you know, animal in this--
>> Lisa: Energy.
>> Stierle: -- of
energy that's coming in.
They're going furious
and I'm enjoying
that furiousness 'cause
there's a series of needs
that that kid is looking
to connect to language wise
that they're depending
on me as a parent
to get connected to that stuff.
>> Lisa: To understand it.
>> Stierle: My first
sentence is, I'm guessing
that you're feeling furious
and you've really likes
to hear what's, you
like me to hear
and understand what's
going on inside you?
>> Lisa: That's an--
>> Stierle: That's a
compassionate response to that.
>> Lisa: To a tantrum.
That's beautiful.
>> Stierle: So I
could get a tantrum
and anybody's kid go
out in 45 seconds.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Stierle: Because I'm
setting my intention
on not trying to
get on to shut up.
I'm trying to set my intention
to the good reason why the
flare up is second place.
Is it about being heard
or is it about choice?
>> Lisa: And you can
use this in anything,
you can use as an
interpersonal relationships
with work relationships,
et cetera.
>> Stierle: That's right.
There's huge difference.
>> Lisa: So here is to say a
general graph here that says,
as the-- you can explain this.
>> Stierle: Oh I
love this slide.
It's like one of
my favorite slides.
'Cause I just sit down
I got like, you know,
I've got three kids and
stepdaughter and, you know,
two boys, 11 and
they're about 12 and 7.
You know, I said, you
know, what are their needs,
when are they coming on
screen, when are they--
when is the needs to
development piece and I looked
at the research that
was out there to
and I really put this list
together to really get to sense
that these are the need
you're really working on.
And with parent groups, you
know, even in a parent groups
or in business groups, when
does the need for respect,
when does when come online
that a kid can really
understand that?
Understand respect.
And it doesn't even show up
until its 14-- until 13, 14.
They can barely touch
that concept.
>> Lisa: Wow.
>> Stierle: So if a
parent has the expectation
that this kid is
suppose to respect me,
they don't even know what
the word is energetically the
definition, how it works, how it
is between two different people,
they're not even
developmentally there.
It's not even on
the radar screen.
>> Lisa: It's amazing, OK.
Well here, we're going to
take a look at the video
of you demonstrating
this problem solving idea
to a group of people.
Let's take a look.
>> Stierle:
[ Background Music ]
The intention of connecting
is really powerful.
>> What Bill teaches
is amazingly powerful.
>> Stierle: I could find
them a reading program.
Tell me more about
what you need.
>> Bill has trained
his mind in a way
that I don't think I've
ever seen in anybody else.
>> He truly cares and
he's compassionate
and was really able to
relate to the audience.
>> Stierle: CFO is blue.
COO is green.
VP of marketing is yellow.
VP of HR is red.
Whether it's speaking to a
group of 500 people or a group
of 15 people in the
executive team,
the thing that I look forward
to is knowledge transfer.
So, the challenge then
is in sales is that each
of this different people
purchase differently.
It's really about the perception
and perspective shift,
individual by individual.
What I love about what
happened to this process
of selecting my dominant color,
it validated what I've always
realized about my self.
And that is that I'm a
high level net worker.
>> What he does is it's like
giving the magic glasses to put
on that allow you to discern
between what's actually
happening
and what you thought
was happening.
'Cause when I'm able to see
and understand what perspective
that I'm coming from and when
I can see what perspective they
are coming form, it
means that I don't have
to force my perspective
on to other people.
>> And the need to sell
'cause it's a good costumer.
Bill has helped me at home
and my relationships with kids
and my wife help me in my own
personal development and growth.
He has helped be a better boss.
And has helped me a
better business owner
and make more money.
>> Stierle: Everybody's thinking
sell and buying decisions
and goes in various
different ways.
>> Bill has a really
interactive teaching style.
>> Stierle: Help
us find the money.
Go ahead.
>> Help us find the money.
>> I love that we were engaged.
We got up.
We got out of our seats
and physically saw
how the brain works.
I thought that was a very
simple yet creative approach.
>> Stierle: Green in going to
end the phone call like this.
Where and when is
the next meeting?
>> It doesn't matter
who he is talking to.
He can teach them in a way
that they receive knowledge.
>> Stierle: You can retire and
the business can run itself
because you've hired
other people to step in.
>> He uses a lot of practical
in everyday examples.
He uses a lot of the
language that I think all
of us have running
in our own heads
or when we've had confrontations
with spouses or business
partners.
>> He's really into crowd.
He's getting feedback
from the crowd
to see what kind of
thinkers they are.
And then, he changes
his presentation style
to match on the fly.
>> Stierle: Emotion and
long term memory win
over logic and future thinking.
>> A lot of times with different
companies that I've worked with.
Three years later, they're
still using my material
as if it happened yesterday.
>> I think it's important for
organizations to do this kind
of thing to improve the
results they'll see.
>> I would highly
recommend Bill Stierle to go
into anybody's organization
and have them increase
their revenues dramatically.
>> Lisa: So then how
can language be used
to reset the green to
achieve peace and progress.
>> Stierle: You know, the
best part about learning how
to use language to
reset the brain
because what happens is
the-- when a feeling word,
when a neuropeptide, a molecule
of emotion is associated
with a need that's causing it.
The person energetically will
get empathy and compassion
and they get the
understanding that you get that.
So if you say, "Boy, see
that you really feel sad
because your need for
connection wasn't met
when that person said that.
The person feels yes,
and they get yes.
That actually creates a chemical
response inside the body.
It creates a-- the molecule
gamma-aminobutyric acid
to be fix in that
calms down the fight,
flight and freeze response.
And then, if that's
repeated back--
>> Lisa: So, that's
the relaxation response
to the body, OK.
And then--
>> Stierle: And then if I,
if say another ones, "Boy,
I really hear that you really
felt mad because your need
for respect wasn't
met with that person.
Is that correct?"
Yes. And then if
that's repeated back,
the person then creates
an experience of oxytocin
which causes boding and
understanding and nurturing
and acceptance to take place.
>> Lisa: That's the--
so that's key.
So that's how to get the person
to relax even your
self to relax.
>> Stierle: That's right.
I'll even say sentences
to myself
if somebody is bringing
me a bunch of junk.
I'll say sentences to
myself 'cause, you know,
I felt confused and I see
there's a lot of pain here
and I just need some
understanding
about what this pain
is coming from.
I calm myself down.
>> Lisa: Just by those words?
>> Stierle: Yes because
I'm connecting.
It's called-- It's really
the road of empathy.
The way I define is empathy
only occurs when a feeling word
and a need word is connected
and then agreed upon
with the word yes.
If I don't get a yes then
empathy it has not taken place.
And don't worry about it.
Just keep guessing, and
they'll tell you yes.
>> Lisa: Yes.
>> Stierle: You know,
I'll tell that yes thing.
And then when they do, the brain
actually calms down and then
that it causes state
of restoration.
>> Lisa: And so, the overall
bell curve here is to start off
as this slide indicates
with awareness
and then understanding.
That moves to acceptance
and then,
the space completely shifts by
feeling heard so that you're,
you listen to, you believe
and then the application
and transformation
actually happens.
>> Stierle: Yeah and then
this is a big part of--
and this is why I love this
slide at the end is that you
and I over this last two
sessions have spent time
and awareness and understanding.
We've spent time
about acceptance.
OK, here are some things
that are actually working
and have some good
truths to them.
The value shift takes
place its like,
hey you know, this
step might work.
You know, this actually
would work.
It's [multiple speaker]--
>> Lisa: Try it and yeah--
>> Stierle: -- let's try
it and watch it works.
Then the practice takes
place for the user
and I believe it to be so.
Why? 'Cause I'm getting-- I'm
not dealing with a, you know,
a 40-minute conflict anymore.
I have a three-minuet conflict.
>> Lisa: Right.
>> Stierle: To think that
might be valuable, you know.
>> Lisa: Yes.
Yes.
>> Stierle: I mean, it to check
that line with it, you know,
and all the sudden this little
flare up, it turns in to three,
20 seconds instead of like
this big upset right there.
And this big upset at the car,
and this big upset at home
and later, and it's like
another's noise such us.
You know so--
>> Lisa: Right.
Right. Well, you have
provided an enormous amount
of information here and
something that is so simple
and how to solve conflict.
It does take practice.
>> Stierle: It does
take practice.
>> Lisa: And awareness, yeah.
>> Stierle: Yeah.
The tools of relatively simple.
The thing is is undoing what
we've been taughtmodeled
from the past and then
just like driving a car
or hitting a baseball or
kicking a soccer ball.
It just takes some practice.
You know, use your
language a little this way.
You know, move the
thing this way.
Oh look at that.
Work better.
That sentence work better.
Hey, look at that.
Right, you know it's
like better.
Hey, I reduced the conflict,
finally.
>> Lisa: If you would like to
watch the replay of my interview
with Bill Stierle, you can go
to gaiamtv.com and share it
with your friends from there.
And until next, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[ Music ]